title: Lab 2
author: Jarrod Millman
date: 2014-02-07
slug: lab02

In this lab, you will:

1. Setup ``git``
2. Create a private homework repository on Github
3. Create an ``info.py`` file

You will need:

1. A Github educational account
2. If you are using your own laptop, please install relevant [software](pages/software)
3. To have completed [Lab 1](lab01)

## First things first

**NOTE: Pay close attention to this section and ask for clarification if you
don't understand any of the steps.  Each lab will begin the same way each week.
But in future weeks, I won't provide these details and will expect you to be
able to get to your repository with out additional instructions.**

First, open your Bash terminal and make sure you are in the top-level directory
of your lab repository.  Check where you are using the ```pwd``` command.  This
is a command that you will use all the time as you become more proficient at
working on the commandline to make sure you are where you are supposed to be
in the filesystem hierarchy.

If you aren't in the correct directory, you need to change your working directory
using the ```cd``` command.  This is another very important command that you will
use regularly.  If you put your repository in the directory I suggested last week,
you should type the following (if not, you will need to change the command below
accordingly):

```bash
cd ~/src/stat133
```

As a further check, take a look at your ```git log```:

```bash
$ git log 
commit bbc329fe5f0672582a3ad3c70f5b86f4acc15f63
Author: Jarrod Millman <jarrod.millman@gmail.com>
Date:   Wed Jan 29 14:19:38 2014 -0800

    Add personal info

commit dead6f41c65e50f444760653205e21083caabfcc
Author: Jarrod Millman <jarrod.millman@gmail.com>
Date:   Tue Jan 28 22:29:33 2014 -0800

    Initial commit
```

If you haven't done any additional ```git commits``` since last week, this log
should be identical to the results you saw at the end of the previous lab.

## Next steps with ``git``

Last week, you used the following ``git`` commands:

```bash
$ git
usage: git <command> [<args>]

The most commonly used git commands are:
   add        Add file contents to the index
   config     Get and set repository or global options
   clone      Clone a repository into a new directory   
   commit     Record changes to the repository
   log        Show commit logs
   push       Update remote refs along with associated objects
   status     Show the working tree status

'git help -a' and 'git help -g' lists available subcommands and some
concept guides. See 'git help <command>' or 'git help <concept>'
to read about a specific subcommand or concept.
```

When you try this on your computer, you will see much more information.  As you
will recall, I reduced the output so that it only contains commands that you used
last week.  Please read the above output carefully and try to remember how you used
these commands last week and what they did.  You've already used ```git log```
again and you will use all the above commands again today (as well as in every
other lab) with the exception of ```git config``` and ```git clone```.  Since
you have already configured ```git``` and ```cloned``` your repository from
Github, you won't need to do that again unless you are working on a different
computer.

Today you will learn one more command:  ```git pull```.  Type ```git pull --help```
at your Bash prompt and you will see something similar to this:

```bash
$ git pull --help

NAME
       git-pull - Fetch from and integrate with another repository or a
       local branch

SYNOPSIS
       git pull [options] [<repository> [<refspec>...]]

DESCRIPTION
       Incorporates changes from a remote repository into the current
       branch. In its default mode, git pull is shorthand for git fetch
       followed by git merge FETCH_HEAD.
```

As you can see, `git pull` will incorporate changes from a remote
repository (in your case, your Github repository).  Since last week,
I've **cloned** everyone's repositories onto my laptop where I used a script
to test whether everyone correctly completed the first lab.  I assigned
grades to everyone and **committed** a file named `grades.json` to
my copy of your repository that is on my computer.  Then, so you can
see the changes I made, I **pushed** my changes back to Github.

In order for you to see your grade, you will need to **pull** my changes
to your local repository from Github:

```bash
$ git pull
```

If everything goes successfully, you will now have an updated copy
of the repository.  Use `git log` to see a more detailed log
of the changes.  For some of you, there may be a conflict with
what you have on your computer and what is on Github.  If you have
any problems, please ask me for help before continuing.

This workflow may take some time to become accustomed to, but this is
the basic process you will use for the rest of the semester:

1. At the start of each lab, use `git pull` from inside your local repository
2. Use `git add` and `git commit` to add and commit new files of changes
   to existing files in your repository
3. Use `git push` to push your changes to Github so that I can see your
   work and assign grades
4. Repeat the following week

## How can I see my grade?

List the contents of your repository:

```bash
$ ls
grades.json  info.py  info.pyc  README.md
```

You should have a file named `grades.json`.  To see the content of
this file, use the `cat` command:

```bash
$ cat grades.json 
{
    "email": "me@school.edu", 
    "grades": {
        "hw1": {
            "earned": 15, 
            "possible": 15
        }
    }, 
    "id": "0123456789", 
    "login": "me", 
    "name": "Full Name", 
    "url": "git@github.com:me/stat133.git"
}
```

This should be fairly (human-)readable, but you will notice that there are
a lot of additional characters that you would probably not use if you were
just writing this information yourself.  The extra characters are there
because this is specific data format called [JSON](http://www.json.org/).
If you are interested, you can follow the above link and read more about
this format.  But it isn't necessary for you to know anything more at this
point other than this is a format that will allow you to load this data
into Python as a dictionary.

In this lab, you are going to learn more about Python dictionaries and
write a little Python program that will read this file and print out
a little summary of your grades to the terminal.

## Python dictionaries

Python [dictionaries](http://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries)
provide a very useful datastructure.  Let's look at a simple example.

Imagine that you want to use Python to store phone numbers.  You might
create a data structure like this:

```python
tel = {'name': "Jarrod Millman",
       'number': '555-1234'}
```

Let's see how this works at the IPython terminal (as opposed to
notebook) command prompt"

```python
$ ipython 
Python 2.7.5 (default, Nov 12 2013, 16:45:54) 
Type "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.

IPython 0.13.2 -- An enhanced Interactive Python.
?         -> Introduction and overview of IPython's features.
%quickref -> Quick reference.
help      -> Python's own help system.
object?   -> Details about 'object', use 'object??' for extra details.

In [1]: tel = {'name': "Jarrod Millman",
   ...:        'number': '555-1234'}

In [2]: tel['name']
Out[2]: 'Jarrod Millman'

In [3]: tel['number']
Out[3]: '555-1234'
```

What if you want to store multiple phone numbers per person?  You
could do something like this:

```python
tel = {'name': "Jarrod Millman",
       'numbers': {
          'home': '555-1234',
          'cell': '555-1235'
       }
      }
```

Let's try this at the IPython prompt:

```python
In [4]: tel = {'name': "Jarrod Millman",
   ...:        'numbers': {
   ...:           'home': '555-1234',
   ...:           'cell': '555-1235'
   ...:        }
   ...:       }

In [5]: tel['name']
Out[5]: 'Jarrod Millman'

In [6]: tel['numbers']
Out[6]: {'cell': '555-1235', 'home': '555-1234'}

In [7]: tel['numbers']['cell']
Out[7]: '555-1235'

In [8]: tel['numbers']['home']
Out[8]: '555-1234'
```

## Lab 2 program

Now that you have a local copy of your repo, you will need to add
some new content before submitting your new lab assignment.

Before adding anything, use the `tree` command to see how your
repository directory structure looks.

```bash
$ tree
.
├── grades.json
├── info.py
└── README.md

0 directories, 3 files
```

Next, you will need to create some subdirectories.

```bash
$ mkdir -p lab1/data
```

Note that you need to use the `-p` option to create `lab1` and
a subdirectory of `lab1` named `data` in one command.  Without
the `-p` option `mkdir` will complain:

```bash
$ mkdir  lab1/data
mkdir: cannot create directory ‘lab1/data’: No such file or directory
```

This error message occurs because the `mkdir` command without the `-p`
option will try to create the subdirectory `data` inside the directory
`lab1`, which doesn't exist yet.  The `-p` options tells `mkdir `

```bash
$ tree
.
├── grades.json
├── info.py
├── lab1
│   └── data
└── README.md

2 directories, 3 files
```

First you will need to create some directories to 
Open your text editor and create a new file, called `grade.py`.  Now
add the following content:

## Submit your work

Next you will query the status of your ``git`` repo:

```bash
$ git status 
On branch master
Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)

        grade.py

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

```bash
git add grade.py 
```

Now check on the status of your repo again:

```bash
$ git status 
On branch master
Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'.

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git reset HEAD <file>..." to unstage)

        new file:   grade.py
```

Everything looks good, so go ahead and commit your change:

```bash
$ git commit -m "Start grading script"
[master bbc329f] Start grading script
 1 file changed, XXX insertions(+)
 create mode 100644 grade.py
```

Next take a look at a log of what's been done using
`git log`.

At this point you've created a new file, added it to your
repo, and committed the current state of your repo.  This
was all done locally, so the next thing to do is push these
changes up to your remote Github repo using `git push`.
